feat: add analytics docs page (#1464)
knocklabs/docs: content/send-notifications/analytics.mdx

---
title: Analytics
description: Learn how to measure message volume, delivery, and engagement across your workflows, guides, and channels.
tags:
  [
    "analytics",
    "metrics",
    "engagement",
    "message volume",
    "delivery rates",
    "dashboard",
  ]

> section: Send notifications

Reviewer: I wonder if we should move Message statuses, Link & open tracking, and Analytics into a new section (maybe called Analytics? and this page becomes Overview?). I don't feel super strongly about this, but wanted to throw it out there.

Author: I'd lean towards just adding this page now. In the future if we add more analytics docs, we could break it out.

---

> The Analytics page in the Knock dashboard gives you a high-level view of message volume, delivery, and engagement across your account. Use it to see how many messages you're processing, track delivery and engagement rates over time, and find the workflows, guides, and channels that drive the most activity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Analytics](https://dashboard.knock.app/~/analytics) page in the Knock dashboard gives you a high-level view of message volume, delivery, and engagement across your account. Use it to see how many messages you're processing, track delivery and engagement rates over time, and find the workflows, guides, and channels that drive the most activity.
```

Every metric on the page reflects the [environment](/concepts/environments) you're viewing and your account's [data retention period](/manage-your-account/data-retention).

{/* TODO: screenshot of the Analytics page overview */}

## Overview

> The top of the page summarizes message activity for your selected time range and filters. Knock generates a [message](/concepts/messages) each time a workflow or broadcast runs a channel step for a recipient, and the summary metrics roll those messages up by [delivery status](/send-notifications/message-statuses#delivery-status).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Overview

{/* TODO: screenshot of the Analytics page overview */}

Metrics found on the Analytics page are scoped to the [environment](/concepts/environments) you're viewing and reflect your account's [data retention period](/manage-your-account/data-retention). The top of the page summarizes message activity for your selected time range and filters. Knock generates a [message](/concepts/messages) each time a workflow or broadcast runs a channel step for a recipient and the summary metrics roll those messages up by [delivery status](/send-notifications/message-statuses#delivery-status).
```

> Below the summary metrics, the page includes two more views of the same data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below the summary metrics, you'll find two additional views:
```

> - **Total messages processed chart.** A time series of message volume across the selected range. You can break this chart down by dimension — see [grouping data](#grouping-data).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Total messages processed chart.** A time series of message volume across the selected range. You can break this chart down by dimension — see [grouping data](#grouping-data) for details.
```

Reviewer: should we include a visual of this also? (both points)

Author: Yeah, I can include another screenshot

- **Top results tables.** Breakdown tables that rank your highest-volume workflows, guides, and channels for the current range and filters.

## Filtering data

> The time range and the filter menu scope every metric, chart, and table on the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The time range and the filter menu scope every metric, chart, and table on the page to your selections.
```

Use the time range selector to choose your reporting window, such as **Last 7 days**. You can report on any window within your account's [data retention period](/manage-your-account/data-retention).

Use the **Filter** menu to narrow the data to a subset of your messages. You can filter by:

> - **Channel.** A specific configured channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Channel.** A specific configured [channel](/concepts/channels).
```

- **Channel type.** A class of channel, such as email, in-app feed, push, SMS, or chat.

> - **Delivery status.** A point in the [delivery lifecycle](/send-notifications/message-statuses#delivery-status), such as delivered or undelivered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Delivery status.** A point in the [delivery lifecycle](/send-notifications/message-statuses#delivery-status), such as `delivered` or `undelivered`.
```

> - **Tenant ID.** The [tenant](/concepts/tenants) a message was sent on behalf of.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Tenant ID.** The [tenant](/concepts/tenants) a message is scoped to.
```

- **Workflow.** The [workflow](/concepts/workflows) that generated the message.
- **Guide.** The [guide](/concepts/guides) that generated the message.

Select your filters and choose **Apply** to update the page, or **Clear** to reset them.

## Grouping data

> The total messages processed chart supports grouping, which splits the single line into one line per value of the dimension you choose. Open the **Group by** menu on the chart and select one dimension:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The total messages processed chart supports grouping, which splits the single line into one line per value of the chosen dimension. Open the **Group by** menu on the chart and select one dimension:
```

- **Channel.** One line per configured channel.
- **Channel type.** One line per class of channel.

> - **Delivery status.** One line per [delivery status](/send-notifications/message-statuses#delivery-status).

Reviewer: For tutorials, we have guidelines to only link concepts on their first mention -- not sure if we want to follow that here or not? if we keep these here, we should add the channel link to bullet one.

Author: I'll remove the link

- **Engagement status.** One line per [engagement status](/send-notifications/message-statuses#engagement-status), such as seen, read, link clicked, interacted, or archived.
- **Workflow key.** One line per [workflow](/concepts/workflows).
- **Guide key.** One line per [guide](/concepts/guides).

> For example, grouping by engagement status renders a separate line for read, link clicked, seen, archived, and interacted, so you can compare how recipients engage over time. You can also set the chart type used to render the series.

Reviewer: It would be good to include a visual above this.

## Analytics page v2 changes

> We're moving Knock analytics to a new data model built on [message events](/send-notifications/message-statuses#message-events). This changes how Knock counts and dates engagement, and it adds a new unique recipients metric. Because of these changes, your counts and the dates they fall on can differ from the previous version of the page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Understanding message events

Knock analytics are based on [message events](/send-notifications/message-statuses#message-events) which affects how engagement is counted and dated. 
```

Reviewer: I think we should write this as current behavior rather than referencing the old version.

Reviewer: The sections below might make more sense as a bulleted list or small table.

Author: I'm good with that. Given we'll link to this from a guide, it'll make sense that these are recent changes.

### Event counts

> Engagement metrics now count every event instead of whether a message was engaged with at least once. A recipient who clicks the same message three times is reported as three clicks rather than one. Expect engagement counts, such as clicks and opens, to run higher than before for messages that recipients interact with more than once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Engagement metrics include every event, not just the first occurence. A recipient who clicks the same message three times is reported as three clicks rather than one. 
```

### Event dates

> Engagement metrics now lands on the date the event occurred rather than the date its message was created. A message sent on March 1 and clicked on March 2 records the click on March 2, so your metrics now reflect when recipients engaged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Engagement metrics are dated to when the event occurred, not when the message was created. For a message sent on March 1st and clicked on March 2nd, Knock shows a click event on March 2nd.
```

### Unique recipients

> We've added **unique recipients** as a top-level overview metric. It counts the number of distinct recipients across the messages processed for your selected time range and filters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unique recipients is a top-level metric that counts the number of distinct recipients across all messages processed for your selected time range and filters.
```
